Akbarnama 76: Akbar’s entry into the fort of Ranthambhor.
Our adventure begins with the Mughal emperor Akbar directing the attack of the imperial forces
on the Rajput fortress of Ranthambhor. Knowing that he would not be able to get
close to the walls without the imperial guard knowing, he instructed Qasem Khan and the
Hindu Raja, Todar Mal to construct sabats -or covers- for the artillery in order to
disguise the weapons. His tactic was successful, “In accordance with orders firing began.
At every discharge there was a reverberation in the mountain, the ears of the solid rocks
were opened and there was a breach in the walls of the fort and the
houses went to dust”. Raja Surjan Hara, the fort’s governor, sued for peace and agreed
to a treaty – the only one of its kind ever signed by the Mughals.
The keys to the fortress were handed to Akbar, who entered it the next day.
The creator of the Akbarnama, Abu’l Fazl notes that the only other Muslim conqueror of
Ranthambor had taken a year to achieve what Akbar’s forces accomplished in a month.
After the short-lasting siege, it is said that “Surjan’s pride was shattered, and the
fire of his disposition quenched”. He subsequently entered Mughal service, and he and his companions
were given many privileges, including the right to carry arms in Akbar’s Hall of Audience.
In Abu’l Fazl’s Akbarnama, this story is accompanied by the illustration you are currently viewing.
This image shows the scene when Akbar infiltrates Ranthambhor. His troops rush up the hill
and through the gates of the fortress, many on horseback and all armed for combat.
The men are brandishing many types of weapons including spears, bows, and swords. Surrounding Ranthambhor,
Akbar’s artillery is hidden under sabats or tent-like structures. Aiming up at the walls
we see an arsenal of cannons, that were instrumental in Akbar’s defeat of Surjan.
The emperor is pictured inside the fort on horseback, as the imperial forces surrender to him.
The image depicts the fort in a stylized manner that contrasts with the European influence
apparent in the naturalistic treatment of the background, where a city is seen through
“misty blue tones of distant Western landscapes”. The painting displays a multi-point perspective
where the artist draws upon a number of details to signify the reality of the event.
He utilized various types of perspective to present a panoptic narrative. The canons placed outside
the tents are shown from an aerial perspective, while other activities are depicted on the
same plane as the viewer. The artist relates scale to significance, as Akbar appears larger
than any structure or being, near him. One’s eyes are drawn to the dominant ‘S’ curve
that unites the top of the image with the bottom. In the book,
“Seeing Across Cultures in the Early Modern World”, art historians Dana Leibsohn and Jeanette Favrot Peterson
state that “the issue is not an inability to understand the principles of European linear perspective.
Rather, for Mughal artists and viewers, it was the amalgamation of different definitions of “optical
accuracy” and alternate visions of representing truth that needed to be negotiated”.